---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 07. ARCHIVING DUTCH DISABILITY ACTIVISM: WHAT CAN DIGITAL CULTURE DO? 

### ELINE POLLAERT & PAUL VAN TRIGT

## Introduction

In 2022 *De Groene Amsterdammer* stated that the work of disability activists in the Netherlands is fragmented, faceless, and mostly forgotten.[^09Chapter7_1] Dutch anti-ableism activism is one of the most invisible forms of activism, struggling to achieve recognition comparable to that of feminist and anti-racist movements. No Netflix movies such as *Crip Camp* (2020) are created about the Dutch disability movement, although recent television series such as *Wheelchair Road Movie* (2019) and *Mari Stands Up* (2021) are starting to reach a broader audience.[^09Chapter7_2] Actually, the fact that the Netherlands has a rich history of disability activism since the 1970s (and even before) remains largely unknown and unacknowledged.[^09Chapter7_3] In this respect, digital culture holds great potential for the disclosure of historical disability activism and the activities of current day disability activists, but also comes with challenges because the accessibility of digital culture is not self-evident. The central question of this chapter is therefore: in what ways can digital culture play a role in archiving Dutch disability activism? 

In this chapter, we use three case studies to reflect on current and
past archival practices relating to disability activism in the
Netherlands and the potentially transformative role of digital tools and
networks for archiving disability activist practices. Before going into
these case studies, we critically conceptualise dominant perceptions of
activism in general and the implications they have for the recognition
and visibility of disability activism. We then introduce our cases with
specific attention to the role of ‘the digital’. Firstly, we discuss the
activities of the disability justice collective Feminists Against
Ableism. We will demonstrate how they use digital tools for maintaining
their networks and participating in activist initiatives. In particular,
we consider the role of these tools and potential obstacles in archiving
practices. Secondly, we consider how digital culture has been used to
archive disability activism, showing how the website DisPLACE.nl has
been used to address the exclusion of disability (activism) in Dutch
archives and to stimulate heritage institutions to ‘crip’ their
collections. Thirdly, we reflect on a community project with the
Kreukelcollectief (Crinkle Collective) on eugenics. In this project, we
have tried to connect different histories, collections, and types of
activists to create an interface in which activists and archives could
interact.

Just as ‘the digital’ has implications for archiving practices, so does
our positionality as researchers writing this article. Therefore, we
finish this introduction with a short description of ourselves and our
involvement with archiving disability history and activism. Eline
Pollaert (they/she) is a disabled, neurodivergent and queer 32-year-old
PhD student in disability history. In addition to their academic work,
they are a member of Feminists Against Ableism and the
Kreukelcollectief, combining research and activism as a public
historian. Paul van Trigt (he/him) is a 43-year-old assistant professor,
does not identify as disabled and is involved in public history
collaborations with activists such as the Kreukelcollectief and
DisPLACE.nl. We are both involved in the NWO research project
‘Disability and Self-Governance: a Global Microhistory of Het Dorp
Community and its Cultural Heritage from the 1960s’ which started in
2022 at the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam.[^09Chapter7_4]

## Problematizing dominant perceptions of (disability) activism

On March 12, 1990, dozens of people with physical disabilities gathered
at the foot of Capitol Hill in Washington D.C. Inside, Congress was
discussing the passing of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
Although the ADA was well on its way to becoming law, progress had been
stalling and disabled people worried about the outcome of the vote.
Suddenly, about 60 people in the crowd threw aside their mobility aids
and spontaneously started crawling up the 78 marble Capitol steps. The
activists wanted to draw attention to the physical and social obstacles
they faced every day in the face of an inaccessible world, cheered on by
others at the bottom of the stairs. Some got down on their hands and
knees, others pulled themselves up by their arms, dragging their
paralysed and atrophied legs upwards one step at a time. Videos and
pictures of the crawlers spread far and wide, especially of the then
8-year old Jennifer Keelan wearing an ADAPT[^09Chapter7_5] bandana, telling ABC
News: ‘I'll take all night if I have to’. The day after, a smaller group
returned, determined to start a sit-in inside the Capitol Rotunda. The
Capitol police, dressed in full riot gear and unsure what to do, started
dragging activists out after strapping them to their wheelchairs and
using chain cutters to separate them. The protests had a major media
impact and the ADA was passed shortly after.

Over 30 years later, the Capitol crawl still is an iconic image of
disability activism.[^09Chapter7_6] The protest was bold, powerful and photogenic –
people all over the country were taken aback by the images of the
Capitol police restraining and forcibly removing peaceful disabled
activists. In other words, this event lodged itself in the public mind
because it was ‘ready to remember’.[^09Chapter7_7] But at whose expense? What other
activist initiatives get overlooked because they are less spectacular
and hence less archivable? Although it is understandable that
provocative and photogenic actions tend to etch themselves firmly in the
public’s mind, we argue that conceptualising disability activism based
on direct action initiatives actually obscures and excludes less visible
and spectacular, but nevertheless equally important disability activism
initiatives. Reiterating conceptions of ‘classic’ protests such as the
Capitol crawl 1. excludes large numbers of disabled activists who are
unable to attend in-person protests, 2. adds to the dismissal of online
activism as inferior ‘armchair activism’ and 3. defines disability
activism in terms of in-person protest, thereby enhancing its
archivability (and in turn diminishing the archivability of other types
of activism). The remainder of this section elaborates on these three
consequential pitfalls.

## Pitfall 1: Exclusion of disabled activists at in-person protests

The first pitfall of focusing on activism defined as in-person protests is the fact that those types of events are only accessible to certain body-minds (fig. 7.1).[^09Chapter7_8] In-person protests not only require certain levels of physical strength, emotional self-regulation capacity, and sensory processing, but also financial resources and privilege (i.e. not being at risk for losing benefits, care, medical devices or citizenship when arrested). Marginalised people are even more at risk of experiencing violence and police brutality. Very few in-person protests take into account disabled body-minds and their access needs, let alone the realities of multiply marginalised disabled people. In practice, this excludes many disabled people who want to raise their voices in support or protest from participating in in-person activist initiatives.  

  ![Fig 7.1. Zoomed-in photograph of a disability activist whose wheelchair is stuck in tram rails, during the Women's March on March 8, 2020 (Amsterdam, the Netherlands). The person is wearing a dark blue wheelchair blanket and is surrounded by other activist using mobility aids. Photographer: Rebekka Mell.](imgs/7.1.jpg)

<br/>

Johanna Hedva, a Korean American contemporary artist, writer and
musician, lives with a chronic condition that regularly incapacitates
them for months at a time. They live in a predominantly Latino
neighbourhood in Los Angeles, which is often an active place of protest.
In their essay ‘Sick Women Theory’, they describe their experience with
the Black Lives Matter protests in a nearby park in 2014 and they were
unable to join due to their health:

> I listened to the sounds of the marches as they drifted up to my
> window. Attached to the bed, I rose up my sick woman fist, in
> solidarity. \[…\] So, as I lay there, unable to march, hold up a sign,
> shout a slogan that would be heard, or be visible in any traditional
> capacity as a political being, the central question of Sick Woman
> Theory formed: How do you throw a brick through the window of a bank
> if you can’t get out of bed?[^09Chapter7_9]

Are you less of an activist if your health does not permit you to
physically attend protests and rallies? Does your body-mind matter less
politically if your access needs are not met by the majority of activist
initiatives? If most activist groups do not even consider ableism and
disabled perspectives in their work in the first place? If the few
disability advocates that are being invited into broader activist
initiatives are so often white, educated, straight, and middle-class?
Hedva’s response is a resounding no. Instead, they offer a radical shift
of perspective:

> Sick Woman Theory is for those who are faced with their vulnerability
> and unbearable fragility, every day, and so have to fight for their
> experience to be not only honored, but first made visible. For those
> who, in Audre Lorde’s words, were never meant to survive: because this
> world was built against their survival. It’s for my fellow
> spoonies,[^09Chapter7_10] my fellow sick and crip crew. You know who you are,
> even if you’ve not been attached to a diagnosis: *one of the aims of
> Sick Woman Theory is to resist the notion that one needs to be
> legitimated by an institution,* so that they can try to fix you
> according to their terms. You don’t need to be fixed, my queens – it’s
> the world that needs the fixing \[emphasis added, EP\].[^09Chapter7_11]

## Pitfall 2: Dismissal of online and hybrid activism

As a consequence of inaccessible in-person protests, many disabled
activists turn to online activism. Since it became available to the
public in 1991, the internet has greatly impacted organisers and
activists in general. Maintaining (international) networks, organising
activities and sharing knowledge became much easier with the rise of
websites, social media, and video conferencing tools. Disability
activism, and disabled activists in particular, profited from the
low-threshold and accessible possibilities that the internet opened up,
because online options allow people to (partially) bypass physical,
emotional and cognitive constraints to participation in in-person
activism. However, attitudes towards digital activism have not always
been positive. Activist groups, and also society in general, used to
in-person organising have dismissed online and hybrid activism as
inferior, not the ‘real deal’ or armchair activism/‘slacktivism’
(referring to people talking about social justice issues online but not
taking concrete action).[^09Chapter7_12]

The limitations of in-person activism became apparent all of a sudden
when the coronavirus pandemic hit. Almost one third of the world
population found themselves in lockdown, unable to carry on with life as
we knew it. For most people, this meant a radical shift in terms of
work, social life and pastime activities. Apart from key workers, most
of us became more or less housebound – just like many chronically ill
and disabled people have been for months, years or even decades. One
crucial difference, however, was that those who had been living
house-bound or even bed-bound before had all kinds of strategies and
mechanisms in place to manage their daily activities and needs. While
nondisabled people were scrambling up the walls in boredom, panic and
frustration, the disabled community relied on online tools and
communities that often had been years in the making.[^09Chapter7_13] All at once,
online activism became the new normal for everyone: individuals,
grassroots activist communities and even NGO campaigns.[^09Chapter7_14] Ironically,
disabled activists did not receive credit for sharing their experience
and knowledge of digital organizing. In fact, an onslaught of online
discussions erupted, questioning the value of the lives of so-called
‘vulnerable’ people.[^09Chapter7_15] Many disability activists felt that not only
their way of organising was dismissed, but that their online activism
strategies and cultures were appropriated by nondisabled
organisers.[^09Chapter7_16]

## Pitfall 3: Domination of in-person protests when it comes to archiving

So far, we have concluded that in-person protests are often inaccessible and that online or hybrid initiatives from disabled organisers regularly have been dismissed for being ‘slacktivism’. This plays into a third pitfall: because in-person protests are continuously presented as actual activism, they become dominant in representation because they are perceived to be more archivable. Focusing on photogenic protests and charismatic leaders shifts the focus away from less public, popular, and visible forms of activism. Think for example of lobby activities, community work, and research projects. Although explicit in-person protest initiatives are sometimes highly effective in gaining public traction for certain topics, ‘behind the scenes activism’ is just as important to achieve social justice. However, this kind of activism is considered to be less archivable, adding another layer to the exclusion of disability activism and disability activists from archives. The invisibility of ‘soft activism’ applies to all types of activism, of course. Because disabled people in the Netherlands tend to be viewed as in need of (medical) support instead of civil rights and emancipation. Therefore, they are more often forced to move in policy and law contexts compared to other marginalised groups.  

In addition, we might ask ourselves who is considered archivable enough
to be remembered as a charismatic disability activist and why. Curator
Katherine Ott of the National Museum of American History remarked that
highlighting disability rights movement figureheads such as Ed Roberts,
who started the Center for Independent Living in Berkeley in 1972,
overlooks many others who were instrumental to the movement. One
practical obstacle in the way of crediting all individual disability
rights activists is a lack of (personal) objects relating to these
persons and their activist activities, which could be used to showcase
them in a museum exhibit. More importantly, she points out that the main
takeaway should be that the disability rights movement ‘… was a
grassroots movement and it was people inspiring each other all over the
place’.[^09Chapter7_17] We have to ask ourselves what kind of socio-cultural biases
affect the representation and archivability of dominating figureheads
(who are often white, male, and middle-class) compared to others
involved in disability activism.[^09Chapter7_18]

In the Dutch context, a critical engagement with dominant cultural and
archival perceptions of disability activism is necessary. It is
noteworthy that the archiving of social movements in the Netherlands is
quite well developed in terms of dedicated archives related to women’s
rights, queer emancipation, and the civil rights movement of Black Dutch
people.[^09Chapter7_19] The International Institute of Social History (IISH),
located in Amsterdam, is even dedicated to the preservation of often
oppressed social movements.[^09Chapter7_20] However, no formal Dutch archives
relating to disability history exist. Prior attempts to deposit private
disability activism collections in the ISSH and secure their future as
archives within the IISH were turned down, because disability was viewed
as a medical topic rather than a social history topic; thus not
archivable. Digital culture has the potential to crack open this impasse
on several levels. The following case studies trace various roles
digital culture might play in archiving disability activism, including
potential challenges.

## Digital disability activism and archiving practices

With these general critical remarks about (disability) activism in mind,
we will now take a closer look at digital culture in relation to
archiving Dutch disability activism. Due to the sometimes ephemeral
nature of sources, coalitions and initiatives, digital activism poses
challenges to historians and archivists of activism.[^09Chapter7_21] This rings
especially true for disability activism in the Netherlands, as
grassroots disability activists tend to engage with issue-centred
initiatives in a fragmented way (rather than in long-term, overarching
collaborations). In addition, disabled activists oftentimes have limited
time, energy and resources at their disposal. This significantly
increases the risk of activist overwhelm or even burnout, causing
short(er)-lived activist engagement. With regard to the latter, digital
and online realms offer much needed tools and accommodations to ‘crip’
disability activism. In this section, we present three cases of
disability activism in the Netherlands today (partly) relying on digital
and online tools. We argue that the conceptualisation of activism is
enhanced by taking digital activism into account in addition to
in-person activism. We also use the three case studies to investigate
various ways in which digital culture can aid in archiving disability
activist practices.

## Case study 1: Disability justice collective Feminists Against Ableism

When a number of disabled activists found each other online in 2018, they started a Facebook group. Their aim was to draw attention to ableism – the interpersonal and systemic exclusion of disabled, chronically ill and neurodivergent folks. The Facebook group offered an increasing number of people the opportunity to share their stories and experiences with day-to-day ableism. A small core group of activists banded together, noticing that mainstream activist initiatives did not take ableism into account or think about the accessibility of their events. This core group then decided to start the disability justice collective Feminists Against Ableism (FAA hereafter).[^09Chapter7_22] Their first achievement was taking part in the national Dutch Women’s March in Amsterdam in 2019. Disability activist Annika Mell gave a speech and the collective headed the march through the city centre. In addition, FAA organised the Online Disability March for those who were too tired, sick, or disabled to attend the in-person protest. Inspired by the January 21, 2017 Disability March, which flanked the Women’s March on Washington they asked people to share their story of why they were unable to attend, including a picture of themselves.[^09Chapter7_23] In their entries, participants in the online disability march indicated that both their health and the inaccessibility of the Women’s March prevented them from being there. They also called attention to other obstacles disabled people face, such as lack of medical research, stereotypes and additional exclusion based on gender, ethnicity and socio-economic class.[^09Chapter7_24] Between 2019 and 2021, FAA was a regular at the Dutch Women’s March stage (fig. 7.2.). Currently, FAA consists of around 15 core members of varying ages, ethnicities, genders and sexual orientations, all identifying as disabled, chronically ill and/or neurodivergent. The collective focuses on organising (online) events, advising organisations about anti-ableism and accessibility, speaking during demonstrations and meetings and creating social media content. 

![Fig. 7.2. Photograph of two members of disability justice collective Feminists Against Ableism, during the Women's March on March 8, 2020 (Amsterdam, the Netherlands). Jeanette Chedda (left) is a 30-something brown woman wearing a black hoodie, a yellow scarf and a green jacket. She is holding hands with Mira Thompson (right), a 20-something white woman wearing a green scarf and a brown jacket. They are surrounded by protest signs and smile broadly at the camera. Photographer: Rebekka Mell.](imgs/7.2.jpg)
 
<br/>

How does FAA go about online and hybrid activist practices? In terms of
building and maintaining its networks, the collective organises itself
*exclusively* online. The members’ communication switched from a
Facebook group to a WhatsApp group to Slack and Discord servers.
Although FAA is a relatively small collective with only 15 members, only
some of them have met each other in person. The members have never been
in the same space collectively. Both their internal and external
connections take place almost exclusively in the online and digital
realm, even prior to the coronavirus pandemic. The collective also works
in a hybrid manner, for example with one or two people co-writing a
speech in a shared online document and a third person reading it out
loud at a protest march. This does not seem to hinder the growth of
their following; more and more individuals and organisations approach
them for requests. The activities that FAA (co-)organises often have an
online or hybrid character as well. These workshops, protests and events
are livestreamed for free when possible, including speech-to-text
interpretation to provide access to those for whom auditory information
is inaccessible.

FAA in no small part depends on digital and online tools for its
anti-ableism activism. This also enables the collective to archive its
own work, independent of formal archives. The aforementioned Online
Disability March submissions are archived on a dedicated part of the FAA
website, for example. The collective has chronicled its own history on
their website as well, in addition to an overview of various types of
resources featuring contributions by collective members (speeches, news
articles, podcasts, etc.) and event recordings.[^09Chapter7_25] Despite offering a
rich overview of its activities, FAA’s online archive is incomplete.
Although the collective is firmly rooted in digital culture, this does
not automatically result in consistent online archiving practices.
Several factors play into this. First, the composition of the collective
has changed a lot over the years. Founding members left and new members
joined, but administrative rights to the collective’s online platforms
have not always been passed on or shared. That leaves some previously
used digital platforms unreachable to current members. Second,
structured and consistent archiving practices require a level of
expertise that the collective members do not have at their disposal.
This includes knowledge regarding the accessibility of archiving
services, both for the makers and users of the archives. In order to
create a proper archive, ideally one or two collective members would
dedicate themselves to crafting a durable archival structure. This ties
in with the third factor, namely that the collective must choose wisely
in what activities to invest its limited time, resources, and energy.
Priority is often given to urgent, immediate matters that have a more
direct or noticeable impact. This factor is compounded by the fact that
not all 15 members are able to invest in the collective together at the
same time due to their health and personal situations, which impacts the
collective’s load capacity as a whole. Choices must be made and
archiving is not a top priority. In other words, disability activism
does not only suffer from archival disinterest, but disability activists
are not always interested in archiving their work either for a variety
of reasons.

Looking at the Feminists Against Ableism case study, it becomes clear
that digital culture is crucial in facilitating their disability
activist activities. It also grants the collective agency to
independently archive its work, despite various obstacles in terms of
member composition, knowledge, resources and prioritisation interfering
with the collective’s archival consistency. In summary, the first role
digital culture might play in archiving disability activism is one of
*facilitation*.

## Case study 2: DisPLACE

Archiving has not always been the first priority of activists who tend to focus more on their immediate goals for social change, as we have seen in the previous case study. However, some Dutch disability activists have long been aware of the importance of the past for their activism – and consequently the relevance of archiving practices. Before academics started to write about the history of Dutch disability activism, activists Jan Troost and Agnes van Wijnen already undertook digital initiatives to document the achievements of disabled self-advocates: they launched websites on which they presented a Dutch disability history timeline, bits and pieces of this history, and oral history interviews.[^09Chapter7_26] These websites were not primarily focused on preserving their individual activism, as is the case with Feminists Against Ableism, but rather on offering a broad overview of disability history and activism in the Netherlands. A website was the ideal medium because of the relatively low costs, potentially broad reach, and the possibility of adding unlimited information. In addition to their digital work, activists Troost and Van Wijnen also maintained non-digital archives and even took over parts of other archives in order to prevent relevant material from being thrown away. In fact, they turned to ‘the digital’ because it was not self-evident that official archives would include disability activism. Because Dutch disability activism has often been considered as non-existent, archival institutions such as the IISH have not acquired relevant collections in contrast with collected sources from more well-known activist groups such as from workers and anticolonial movements.[^09Chapter7_27] Disclosure thus was an important function of Troost’s and Van Wijnen’s websites. 

When author Van Trigt became interested in the history of Dutch
disability activism and aware of the existence of archives at people’s
homes or in poor condition at organizations, together with Deaf
historian and self-advocate Corrie Tijsseling, and public historian
Manon Parry, he started the BIB Netwerk (Bronnen voor Inclusieve
Burgerschap, meaning ‘Sources for Inclusive Citizenship’), to stimulate
the collection and interpretation of disability histories.[^09Chapter7_28] Once
again digital culture was used by the initiators to call attention to
the history of disability activism in the first place. They secured a
small grant which enabled them to build a website, designed by a digital
heritage company with guidance from self-advocates, which was launched
on March 20, 2019: DisPLACE.nl (fig. 7.3.).[^09Chapter7_29] This website was
different from earlier initiatives because it has not only presented
stories from the perspective of disabled people, but also documented
these stories with information and illustrations from personal archives
and heritage institutions. Each year, students work with volunteers from
the BIB Netwerk to produce histories around a specific theme. In this
way, DisPLACE is ‘cripping’ collections: the website has pointed to the
existence of disability in existing heritage collections, has provided
these collections with a new interpretation and has presented new, often
personal source material that complements official archives. Although
the focus of DisPLACE is broader than activism only, it has made the
history of Dutch disability activism more visible and has also
contributed to its digital archiving. Moreover, the website was designed
with disabled people in order to make it as accessible as possible for
people with different disabilities.

![Fig. 7.3. Screenshot of the DisPLACE website. The DisPLACE logo at the top is followed by a short description of the website, three highlighted posts, a section on accessibility and co-creation, DisPLACE’s mission and finally the colophon. Screenshot taken on July 18, 2023.](imgs/7.3.png)

<br/>

DisPLACE has generally been received well by historians and
self-advocates: during the launch of the website for instance, the
initiative was praised by the chair of the main Dutch Association of
Historians and by an activist employed by the main Dutch self-advocacy
organisation Ieder(in). However, it has turned out to be a challenge to
maintain the DisPLACE website and further improve it by adding new
stories and materials. This is a matter of time and money, in particular
because maintaining the accessibility of the website requires extra
investment. Despite these practical obstacles, the DisPLACE case study
draws attention to the potential that digital culture holds for
disclosing Dutch disability history and activism at large. In summary,
the second role digital culture might play in archiving disability
activism is offering an *interface*, deliberately connecting archival
and historical materials to a broad audience of non-historians.

## Case study 3: Digital community project on eugenic histories

As has become clear from the previous case studies, we do not consider digital culture to be an active agent, neither do we see it as a simple tool for archiving activism that leaves archives and (disability) activism unchanged. The digital realm presents challenges and offers opportunities, holding potential for rethinking and innovating archival practices. In fact, we have initiated a project that explores the potential of digital culture to archive disability activism in a way that leads to new collections and new insights into past and present. A couple of years ago, we were approached by the D4D research team from the UK that wanted to bring together people from the UK, the Netherlands and Germany in order to explore the complex and troubling issue of eugenics and the impact that ‘eugenic logic’ imposed on disabled communities in both the past and the present. Because the pandemic made an international gathering impossible, we were asked to organize a Dutch event that would result in audio-visual material for the D4D website or even a virtual museum. We decided to make use of an already existing Dutch network and of an exhibition idea when we responded to the request from D4D and to use this project as a new step in archiving activism.[^09Chapter7_30] 

Together with the so-called Kreukelcollectief (Crinkle Collective,
consisting of disabled activists, artists and academics) we approached
Dutch eugenics from the perspective of the Second World War and prenatal
screening. We selected five stories and objects related to eugenics,
including photographs, clothing, and videos, partially based on a
forthcoming Kreukelcollectief exhibition called ‘Places of Pride and
Sorrow’.[^09Chapter7_31] The stories and objects were presented to the participants
as the starting point of the workshop. The first story concerned the
biographies of three inhabitants of the Willem Arntsz Hoeve, a
psychiatric facility in Den Dolder where many patients died due to
neglect and starvation during and right after World War II.[^09Chapter7_32] The
second story presented the memorial that was revealed at the Willem
Arntsz Hoeve in 2016, as an acknowledgement of these events.[^09Chapter7_33] The
third object was a worn-out T-shirt from the 1990s depicting a DNA helix
centred in a bulls’ eye, with the phrase ‘FAIR GAME?’ underneath (see
fig. 7.4.). This T-shirt had been worn during protests against the
increasing prenatal screening for disabilities in foetuses. The fourth
story was a recorded fragment of a 1995 satirical play entitled ‘The
Museum 2040’ about a museum in a dystopian future where disabled people
are exhibited, having gone extinct due to prenatal screening.[^09Chapter7_34] The
fifth and final story was a snippet of the 2000 documentary *Dead End*,
chronicling the life and death of the Dutch Jewish and disabled
accountant and teacher Alexander Katan.[^09Chapter7_35] These five stories and
objects were used not only to discuss eugenics with the workshop
participants, but also to address ways to unlearn eugenics and to
explore the ‘otherwise’ .[^09Chapter7_36]

![Fig. 7.4. Photograph of late disability activist Jan Troost in 2021, wearing a worn-out white T-shirt depicting a DNA helix centred in a bulls’ eye, with the phrase ‘FAIR GAME?’ underneath. Jan Troost is a white man in his 60s wearing glasses, gazing straight into the camera. Photographer: Paula Boek.](imgs/7.4.jpg)
  
 <br/>

In two virtual workshops which took place in 2021, we brought together
13 participants who self-identify as disabled and/or neurodivergent,
with lived experiences of disability. During the first workshop a series
of objects and documents related to the five cases was presented by
members of the Kreukelcollectief to the participants as a starting point
for discussion and questions: how might they re-interpret these objects?
Which of the materials do they feel are most significant and tell the
most powerful stories? Have they got ideas for alternative materials
that they would like to see included? For the second workshop, then, we
asked the participants to respond to the cases and materials presented
and to use creative methods for their response, such as collage,
creative writing, theatre performance and song. The workshops were
recorded in an unobtrusive way, in order to use fragments for the D4D
website about eugenics.

The five starting objects/stories presented during the first workshop
were not all produced by activists, but were nevertheless
(re)appropriated by them as relevant for their self-understanding as
disability activists. This (re)appropriation was possible thanks to the
digital availability of historical materials and the fact that they
could be made easily accessible through digital tools. The workshops
also provided insight in the different ways in which people do (or do
not) relate to the past and the implications of this for archiving
practices. The workshops as accessible online events made connections
possible between activists from different backgrounds and generations.
They facilitated a dialogue about these connections: we brought people
together by inviting them to the workshop, but this does not mean that
their histories are connected or that they experience them as such. It
is important to articulate these dynamics, because they make us aware of
the politics of archiving. What has to be archived, how, by whom, where
and why? Due to the set-up of the workshops, they also resulted in new
input for activist archives (fig. 7.5.). Because we asked the
participants to respond, they not only produced new archival materials,
but they also shared contemporary stories with urgent archival
relevance. People told for instance how they were threatened in the
recent past with clear references to what the Nazis did to disabled
people before and during World War II. This is surprising, given that
hardly attention is paid to this aspect of the war in Dutch public
remembrance culture. Such stories are relevant to store. The belated
appearance into circulation shows that archiving activism is an endless
and urgent endeavour.

![Fig. 7.5. Photograph of a collage-painting made by Jacqueline Kool. Religious and archival images connected to life and death are placed in a tangle of tree roots, framed by a banner with the text ‘Life... Oh... Life’. Multimedia (paper, acrylic paint, flowers from Alchemilla Vulgaris (lady’s mantle), plastic). Photograph: Jacqueline Kool.](imgs/7.5.jpg)

<br/>

The presentation of the project on the D4D website is still in progress,
but the workshops already showed how this digital format could serve the
archiving of disability activism. The workshops enabled the activists to
show materials from their personal collections and to share acquired
knowledge about disability history with peers. This allowed them to
exchange knowledge across disabilities, generations and activist
practices. As such, it was in line with the aims of digital archival
activist projects such as DisPLACE. Moreover, the D4D case study
suggests that digital culture might play a role as a *generative hub* in
archiving disability activism. As we concluded earlier, DisPLACE already
functions as an interface by connecting public and private collections
and by disclosing activism and activist archives. The D4D project then
adds an extra layer of functionality to digital culture, by purposely
generating interactions between activists and archives and thereby
creating new networks and archival materials.

## Conclusion
Circling back to the main question: In what ways can digital culture play a role in archiving disability activism and what kind of challenges may arise in this process?  

We started this chapter with a few reflections on dominant perceptions
of activism in general, in order to position disability activism in
relation to other forms of activism. Generally speaking, activism is
conceptualised in terms of direct action and hands-on initiatives,
usually disruptive in character. As a result of this ‘classic’ activism
blueprint, 1. large numbers of disability activists who are unable to
attend in-person protests are excluded, 2. online activism is dismissed
as inferior ‘armchair activism’, and 3. the direct action blueprint
leads to the obscuring and even exclusion of less visible and less
spectacular disability activist initiatives. A focus on ‘classic’
conceptualisations of activism leaves disability activism at risk of
being perceived as inferior or less effective. This in turn may lead to
disability activism being perceived as less archivable, leading to a
lack of interest in the history of disability activism on the part both
of archivists and of disability activists.

The three case studies we presented suggest that the digital offers
opportunities as well as challenges when it comes to archiving Dutch
disability activism. Digital and online tools impact both archiving
practices and disability activism. In terms of opportunities, these
tools offer new venues to make possible partnerships and collaborations
between disability activists and others, especially when they are faced
with health constraints. Furthermore, digital and online tools
facilitate the collection of existing disability activism materials and
stories, but also their presentation to the public. These tools also
present disability activists with opportunities to produce new archival
materials and (re)connect across backgrounds and generations. The three
case studies illustrated three potential roles digital culture can play
with regard to archiving disability activism: 1. *facilitating* activist
and self-archiving activities; 2. providing an active *interface* that
connects archival materials to broader audiences; and 3. constituting a
*generative hub* that actively stimulates the creation of new archival
materials and activist networks.

In terms of obstacles, the three case studies made clear that digital
culture is not a ‘quick fix’ for archival disinterest in disability
activism and vice versa. Setting up structured and consistent archives
takes time, resources, and knowledge that may not be readily available
or a priority to disability activists. Additionally, collecting and
sharing archival materials in such a way that is accessible and
available in both the short and the long term, requires significant
resources which may not always be readily available. An important
requirement for advancing the collection and archiving of disability
activist histories is thus an equitable collaboration between archivists
and activists, in order to alert one another to potential oversights and
shortcomings and to strengthen the impact of each other’s work.

In conclusion, we think it is undeniable that digital culture has the
potential to archive disability activism in a way that leads to new
insights into past and present. Formal archives continue to exclude
disability history from their collections, especially in the
Netherlands. Digital and online platforms offer grassroot activists
tools to collect and share their private collections with other
(disability) activists and the public, thereby connecting stories and
insights which remained fragmented earlier. This may also lead to the
production of new archival stories, collections, and materials. However,
disability activists must have resources at their disposal to actually
be able to develop and sustain their own archives in an accessible way.
Taking care of one’s communities is a form of participatory heritage
activism; archiving can be an act of activism in itself. Both private
and formal archival institutions can and should profit from this
development, especially when it comes to the acknowledgement of
disability activism as an integral part of social movements and history.
A critical rethinking of and (re)connection to archiving disability
activism is needed for the integration of digital archival activist
projects into formal archives. Together we must design ways for heritage
institutions to learn from the working methods of disabled (archival)
activists and from the way they design access. Otherwise, disabled
people and their histories will continue to be shut out of traditional
archives as both subjects and researchers.

## References

Adam, Muhammad Jazli. ‘Armchair Activism: Social Media during Social
Unrest’, *UKEC,* 18 June 2020,
<https://www.ukeconline.com/armchair-activism/>

Berne, Patty. ‘Disability Justice – A Working Draft by Patty Berne’,
*Sins Invalid*, 10 June 2015,
<https://www.sinsinvalid.org/blog/disability-justice-a-working-draft-by-patty-berne>

Cabrera, Nolan L., Matias, Cheryl E. and Montoya, Roberto. ‘Activism or
Slacktivism? The Potential and Pitfalls of Social Media in Contemporary
Student Activism’, *Journal of Diversity in Higher Education* 10.4
(2017): 400–15.

Clare, Eli. *Brilliant Imperfection: Grappling with Cure*, Durham: Duke
University Press, 2017.

Derbali, Naïm. ‘Men is tevreden met de kruimels’, *De Groene
Amsterdammer*, 13 August 2022,
<https://www.groene.nl/artikel/men-is-tevreden-met-de-kruimels>

Dobransky, Kerry and Hargittai, Eszter. ‘Piercing the Pandemic Social
Bubble: Disability and Social Media Use About COVID-19’, *The American
Behavioral Scientist* 65.12 (2021): 1698–1720.

Doran, Kai. ‘The Problem with Armchair Activism’, *The M-A Chronicle,*
12 June 2021,
<https://www.machronicle.com/the-problem-with-armchair-activism/>

Elias, Megan. ‘Armchair Activism: How Social Media Changed the Way We
Make Change’, *The Current,* Winter Issue (2020–2021): 38–42.

Gietema, Marco and aan de Stegge, Cecile. *Vergeten slachtoffers.
Psychiatrische inrichting De Willem Arntsz Hoeve in de Tweede
Wereldoorlog*, Amsterdam: Boom uitgevers, 2016.

Hedva, Johanna. ‘Sick Woman Theory’, *Mask Magazine*, 19 January 2016,
<https://pocatech.org/sites/default/files/digital_resources/Sick%20Woman%20Theory_0.pdf>

Herzog, Dagmar. *Unlearning Eugenics. Sexuality, Reproduction, and
Disability in Post-Nazi Europe*, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press,
2018.

Juhasz, Alexandra. ‘Forgetting ACT UP’, *The Quarterly Journal of
Speech* 98.1 (2012): 69–74.

Kafai, Shayda. *Crip Kinship*, Vancouver: Arsenal Pulp Press, 2021.

Koster-Dreese, Yolan and van Wijnen, Agnes (eds). *Trots en treurnis:
gehandicapt in Nederland*, Amsterdam: Singel Uitgevers, 1996.

Lindström, Lisa. *Archiving in the Era of Online Activism: Challenges
and Practices of Collecting and Providing Access to Activist Social
Media Archives,* MA thesis, Lund: Lund University, 2019.

Miserandino, Christine. ‘The Spoon Theory Written by Christine
Miserandino’, *But You Don’t Look Sick*,
<https://butyoudontlooksick.com/articles/written-by-christine/the-spoon-theory/>,
2003.

Mol, Annemarie. *The Body Multiple. Ontology in Medical Practice*,
Durham: Duke University Press, 2002.

Parry, Manon S., Tijsseling, Corrie and van Trigt, Paul. ‘Slow,
Uncomfortable and Badly Paid. DisPLACE and the Benefits of Disability
History’ in Adele Chynoweth, Bernadette Lynch, Klaus Petersen and Sarah
Smed (eds), *Museums and Social Change*. London-New York: Routledge,
2020, 149–59.

Pulrang, Andrew. ‘What Disabled People Are Thinking and Feeling About
The Pandemic, One Year Later’, *Forbes*, 21
March 2021,
<https://www.forbes.com/sites/andrewpulrang/2021/03/21/what-disabled-people-are-thinking-and-feeling-about-the-pandemic-one-year-later/?sh=511604113277>

Serlin, David. ‘Making Disability Public: An Interview with Katherine
Ott’, *Radical History Review* 94 (2006): 197–211*.*

Troost, Jan. ‘Theater Aaibaarheidsfactor10: Het Museum in 2030 over
genetische defecten en hun hulpmiddelen!’, Troost over Leven, 22
February 2014,
<https://troostoverleven.nl/2014/02/theater-aaibaarheidsfactor10-het-museum-in-2030-over-genetische-defecten-en-hun-hulpmiddelen/>

Troost, Jan. *Troost Over Leven; 50 jaar belangenbehartiging en
ondeugd*. Amsterdam: Inclusie Verenigt, 2022.

[^09Chapter7_1]: Naïm Derbali, ‘Men is tevreden met de kruimels’, *De Groene
    Amsterdammer*, 13 August 2022,
    https://www.groene.nl/artikel/men-is-tevreden-met-de-kruimels

[^09Chapter7_2]: ‘Rolstoel Road Movie’ website,
    <https://www.npostart.nl/rolstoel-roadmovie/VPWON_1296793>; ‘Mari
    Staat Op’ website,
    <https://www.npostart.nl/mari-staat-op/VPWON_1321256>

[^09Chapter7_3]: Jan Troost, *Troost Over Leven; 50 jaar belangenbehartiging en
    ondeugd*, Amsterdam: Inclusie Verenigt, 2022.

[^09Chapter7_4]: Rethinking Disability project website,
    <https://rethinkingdisability.net/projects/disability-self-governance/>

[^09Chapter7_5]: ADAPT (formerly American Disabled for Attendant Programs Today) is
    a United States grassroots disability rights organization with
    chapters in 30 states and Washington, D.C. They use nonviolent
    direct action in order to bring about disability justice.

[^09Chapter7_6]: In the context of this chapter, we define disability activism as
    any initiative relating to anti-ableism and the advancement of
    disability liberation – be it individual or collective, in person or
    online, planned or spontaneous. We point here to the distinction
    between disability activism (in which nondisabled activists can also
    engage) and the involvement of disabled activists in other forms of
    activism which are not directly related to disability and
    anti-ableism. The scope of this chapter does not include the latter.

[^09Chapter7_7]: Alexandra Juhasz, ‘Forgetting ACT UP’, *The Quarterly Journal of
    Speech* 98.1 (2012): 72.

[^09Chapter7_8]: We follow Eli Clare’s use of the term body-mind here: ‘I followed
    the lead of many communities and spiritual traditions that recognize
    body and mind not as two entities but as one, resisting the dualism
    built into white Western culture… I settled on *body-mind* in order
    to recognize both the inextricable relationships between our bodies
    and our minds and the ways in which the ideology of cure operates as
    if the two are distinct – the mind superior over the body, the mind
    defining personhood, the mind separating humans from nonhumans’. Eli
    Clare, *Brilliant Imperfection: Grappling with Cure*, Durham: Duke
    University Press, 2017, xvi-xvii. See for instance Annemarie Mol’s
    work on the body for an attempt within the west to rethink (and
    redo) body-mind relations: Annemarie Mol, *The Body Multiple.
    Ontology in Medical Practice*, Durham: Duke University Press, 2002.

[^09Chapter7_9]: Johanna Hedva, ‘Sick Woman Theory’, *Mask Magazine*, 19 January
    2016, 1 and 5,
    <https://pocatech.org/sites/default/files/digital_resources/Sick%20Woman%20Theory_0.pdf>

[^09Chapter7_10]: Christine Miserandino came up with the spoon theory in 2003 while
    sitting in a restaurant, wanting to explain to a friend her
    experiences with Lupus. She used the spoons on the table as a
    metaphor for the limited amount of energy chronically ill and
    disabled people have. Compared to nondisabled people, everyday acts
    such as washing oneself or cooking take more spoons, forcing
    disabled people to meticulously plan their activities. Since then,
    ‘spoonie’ has become a term of endearment amongst disabled and
    chronically ill people. Christine Miserandino, ‘The Spoon Theory
    written by Christine Miserandino’, *But You Don’t Look Sick*,
    [https://butyoudontlooksick.com/articles/written-by-
    christine/the-spoon-theory/](https://butyoudontlooksick.com/articles/written-by-%20christine/the-spoon-theory/),
    2003.

[^09Chapter7_11]: Hedva, ‘Sick Women Theory’, 8–9.

[^09Chapter7_12]: Nolan L. Cabrera, Cheryl E. Matias and Roberto Montoya, ‘Activism
    or Slacktivism? The Potential and Pitfalls of Social Media in
    Contemporary Student Activism’, *Journal of Diversity in Higher
    Education* 10.4 (2017): 400–415. See also Kai Doran ‘The Problem
    with Armchair Activism’, *The M-A Chronicle,* 12 June 2021,
    https://www.machronicle.com/the-problem-with-armchair-activism/;
    Muhammad Jazli Adam, ‘Armchair Activism: Social Media during Social
    Unrest’, *UKEC*, 18 June 2020,
    https://www.ukeconline.com/armchair-activism/

[^09Chapter7_13]: Kerry Dobransky and Eszter Hargittai, ‘Piercing the Pandemic
    Social Bubble: Disability and Social Media Use About COVID-19’, *The
    American Behavioral Scientist* 65.12 (2021): 1698–1720*.*

[^09Chapter7_14]: Megan Elias, ‘Armchair Activism: How Social Media Changed the Way
    We Make Change’, *The Current*, Winter Issue (2020–2021): 38–42.

[^09Chapter7_15]: Andrew Pulrang, ‘What Disabled People Are Thinking and Feeling
    About The Pandemic, One Year Later’, *Forbes*, 21 March 2021,
    https://www.forbes.com/sites/andrewpulrang/2021/03/21/what-disabled-people-are-thinking-and-feeling-about-the-pandemic-one-year-later/?sh=511604113277.

[^09Chapter7_16]: Covid-19: Appropriation of disability
    culture & movements, Asian American Arts Alliance (AAARTS), 10 May
    2022,
    <https://www.aaartsalliance.org/events/covid-19-appropriation-of-disability-culture-movements>

[^09Chapter7_17]: David Serlin, ‘Making Disability Public: An Interview with
    Katherine Ott’*, Radical History Review* 94 (2006): 205.

[^09Chapter7_18]: Juhasz, ‘Forgetting ACT UP’: 72.

[^09Chapter7_19]: Institute on gender equality and women's history,
    <https://institute-genderequality.org/>; IHLIA LGBTI Heritage,
    <https://ihlia.nl/en/>; The Black Archives.
    <https://www.theblackarchives.nl/home.html>

[^09Chapter7_20]: Mission statement, International
    Institute of Social History,
    <https://iisg.amsterdam/en/about/mission>

[^09Chapter7_21]: Lisa Lindström, *Archiving in the Era of Online Activism:
    Challenges and Practices of Collecting and Providing Access to
    Activist Social Media Archives,* MA thesis, Lund University 2019,
    https://www.lunduniversity.lu.se/lup/publication/8980793.

[^09Chapter7_22]: The disability justice movement emerged from the mainstream
    disability rights movement in 2006, specifically from and for
    disabled queer of colour communities. The framework was conceived by
    Patty Berne, Mia Mingus, Stacey Milburn, Leroy F. Moore and Eli
    Clare. Shayda Kafai, *Crip Kinship*, Vancouver: Arsenal Pulp Press,
    2021, 22; Patty Berne, ‘Disability Justice
    – A Working Draft by Patty Berne’, *Sinsinvalid*, 10 June 2015,
    https://www.sinsinvalid.org/blog/disability-justice-a-working-draft-by-patty-berne.

[^09Chapter7_23]: Disability March, <https://disabilitymarch.com/>

[^09Chapter7_24]: Online Disability March 2019 stories,
    <https://feministsagainstableism.nl/categorie/online-disability-march/verhalen-2019/>

[^09Chapter7_25]: Formation of Feminists Against Ableism,
    <https://feministsagainstableism.nl/over-faa/ontstaan-van-faa/>

[^09Chapter7_26]: Gehandicapten Schrijven Geschiedenis,
    <https://gehandicaptenschrijvengeschiedenis.nl>; Aparticipatie,
    <https://aparticipatie.nl>

[^09Chapter7_27]: A notable exception to this rule is the Dutch queer archive IHLIA
    (Internationaal Homo/Lesbisch Informatiecentrum en Archief), which
    dedicates a part of their archive to the intersection of queerness
    and disability.

[^09Chapter7_28]: Corrie Tijsseling, <https://corrietijsseling.nl/>; Manon Parry,
    [www.uva.nl/en/profile/p/a/m.s.parry/m.s.parry.html](http://www.uva.nl/en/profile/p/a/m.s.parry/m.s.parry.html)

[^09Chapter7_29]: Manon S. Parry, Corrie Tijsseling and Paul van Trigt, ‘Slow,
    Uncomfortable and Badly Paid. DisPLACE and the Benefits of
    Disability History’ in Adele Chynoweth, Bernadette Lynch, Klaus
    Petersen and Sarah Smed (eds), *Museums and Social Change*,
    London-New York: Routledge, 2020, 149–159.

[^09Chapter7_30]: Brave New World exhibition,
    <https://d4d.org.uk/workstreams/brave-new-world/brave-new-world-exhibition/>

[^09Chapter7_31]: The title of the exhibition refers to the 1996 landmark book
    *Pride and Sorrow: Disabled in the Netherlands*, which was the first
    Dutch publication on disability written by disabled people
    themselves. Yolan Koster-Dreese and Agnes van Wijnen (eds), *Trots
    en treurnis: gehandicapt in Nederland*, Amsterdam: Singel Uitgevers,
    1996.

[^09Chapter7_32]: Marco Gietema and Cecile aan de Stegge, *Vergeten slachtoffers.
    Psychiatrische inrichting De Willem Arntsz Hoeve in de Tweede
    Wereldoorlog,* Amsterdam: Boom uitgevers, 2016. The outcomes of a
    larger follow-up research project investigating multiple psychiatric
    institutions will be presented in the fall of 2023: ‘Mental
    institutions under pressure’,
    https://www.niod.nl/en/projects/mental-institutions-under-pressure.

[^09Chapter7_33]: VGN, ‘Gedenkteken voor vergeten
    oorlogsslachtoffers Willem Arntsz Hoeve’,
    <https://www.vgn.nl/nieuws/gedenkteken-voor-vergeten-oorlogsslachtoffers-willem-arntsz-hoeve>

[^09Chapter7_34]: Jan Troost, ‘Theater Aaibaarheidsfactor10: Het Museum in 2030
    over genetische defecten en hun hulpmiddelen’, *Troost Over Leven*,
    22 February 2014,
    <https://troostoverleven.nl/2014/02/theater-aaibaarheidsfactor10-het-museum-in-2030-over-genetische-defecten-en-hun-hulpmiddelen/>

[^09Chapter7_35]: Netherlands Film Commission, ‘Dood
    spoor?’,
    <https://filmcommission.nl/database/production/dood-spoor-3/>

[^09Chapter7_36]: Dagmar Herzog, *Unlearning Eugenics. Sexuality, Reproduction, and
    Disability in Post-Nazi Europe*, Madison: University of Wisconsin
    Press, 2018.
