---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 08. CHALLENGING OPPRESSIVE LEGACIES THROUGH ARCHIVAL PRAXIS IN THE DIGITAL AGE

### FLORE JANSSEN

## Introduction: Activism in digital archival praxis

Archivy, the discipline of archives, combines two interconnected forms
of archival work: the theoretical and scholarly work of academic
archival studies and the practical work of archives management.[^10Chapter8_1] The
two branches of the discipline are interdependent and mutually
informative: most archival scholars are also archives practitioners
while many practitioners also continue to develop their practice through
professional networks and academic engagement. Across this spectrum of
archival work, personal professional responsibility is taken very
seriously. Most archival workers – who may well bear sole responsibility
for archives – are highly conscious of the influence their individual
decisions will have on the preservation of and access to the records in
their care. Unsurprisingly, therefore, much archival scholarship
reflects a keen self-awareness about the impact of conscious and
unconscious bias both in archival work and in archival collections. The
practice of stating personal positionality is a common one in archival
studies publications.

This acknowledgment of personal positionality has developed largely as a
challenge to traditional ideas of the archivist as a neutral custodian
of records and the information they carry: a notion that underpinned
much of the foundational archival theory that emerged predominantly in
western Europe around the turn of the twentieth century. As Randall C.
Jimerson, an established US-based archival scholar, stated in 2007:
‘Archivists cannot escape by hiding behind a veil of innocence,
neutrality, and impartiality’.[^10Chapter8_2] Archival praxis affects how records
are encountered, accessed, understood and activated, and many in the
profession actively work to turn this influence to a wider social good.
The turn from custody to access as archivists’ key work, of which
decolonial archival scholar Jeanette A. Bastian was an early and
influential advocate, is an important aspect of this development.[^10Chapter8_3]
Individual archivists may differ, however, in whether they perceive
their engagement with and pursuance of these developments as a form of
activism within their profession or simply as conscientious
professionalism.

In the introduction to their 2015 special issue of *Archival Science* on
‘archiving activism and activist archiving’, Andrew Flinn and Ben
Alexander describe two forms of archival praxis that ‘\[reject\]
professional advocacy of neutrality and passivity'. They call these
approaches ‘active archiving’ and ‘archival activism’ and define them as
follows:

> an active archivist or active archiving describes an approach to
> archival practice which \[…\] acknowledges the role of the
> recordkeeper in ‘actively’ participating in the creation, management
> and pluralization of archives and seeks to understand and guide the
> impact of that active role. \[…\] Archival activism describes
> activities in which archivists, frequently professionally trained and
> employed but not exclusively so, seek to campaign on issues such as
> access rights or participatory rights within records’ control systems
> or act to deploy their archival collections to support activist groups
> and social justice aims.[^10Chapter8_4]

These definitions highlight the intersection between theoretical,
practical and activist approaches to archival work. At each of these
levels, archives workers and users seek solutions to questions around
equity and social justice and learn from one another.

As I will highlight in this chapter, this includes challenges and
reforms to established archival praxis and principles, particularly
where these were founded on assumptions that reflect and often support
the interests of dominant cultural and social groups. The
reconsideration of established praxis is especially relevant as
archivists adapt their work to digital technologies and explore
possibilities for digital innovation in different areas of their
profession. I argue that in this area, Flinn and Alexander’s definition
of active archiving must meet activist archiving in order to avoid
reproducing in accessible, digital form the oppressive hierarchies that
have marked archival traditions.

I begin this chapter by providing more background and context to the
myth of archival neutrality, and in particular, will focus on the
oppressive structures it perpetuates and the risks it poses to digital
projects with a progressive, social justice-oriented aim. I then
consider some examples of how digital projects, including both digital
repositories for existing archival records and new digital archives,
have been challenging injustices embedded in archival records and
structures. Through these examples, I make the case that archivists have
a responsibility to acknowledge the potential risks of replicating
accepted archival norms and practices in digital innovation.

My own professional positionality in these debates is that of a
qualified archivist as well as that of a user of archives for academic
research with a particular interest in marginalized voices and
experiences and how these can be recovered from archival records.
Digital innovation can provide wonderful opportunities for increasing
the visibility, accessibility and recognition of such marginalized
experiences, but unless it is approached with care, conscientiousness
and, wherever possible, collaboration with affected subjects and
communities, archivists risk perpetuating the very violence, exclusion
and oppression we seek to challenge.

## The myth of archival neutrality

Few archivists would embrace the role famously challenged by the late
Terry Cook, an influential Canadian archival theorist, as ‘neutral,
invisible, silent handmaidens of historical research’.[^10Chapter8_5]
Nevertheless, the idea of the archivist as a neutral custodian has a
long history and remains current; in defining how it is rejected by some
archivists, Flinn and Alexander acknowledge that ‘professional advocacy
of neutrality and passivity' still exists. Rooted in the work of
foundational archival theorist Hilary Jenkinson, it is based on the
perception that archivists’ paramount responsibility is to preserve
records as carriers of information. In this understanding, archivists’
role is perceived as an almost passive one, focusing on storage and care
of documents.[^10Chapter8_6] Activities like accessioning and cataloging are viewed
as neutral and impartial. Whether they are acknowledged or not, however,
it is evident that the perspective and priorities of the archivist are
likely to emerge, for instance, in decisions about the acquisition of
material and in word choice in record descriptions, even when these are
circumscribed by institutional policies on collection and description.

In addition, the records that make up archives can never be neutral and
the majority are likely to be representative of dominant cultures and
identities, structures and hierarchies. Michelle Caswell, an archival
scholar with a strong interest in social justice, argues that
‘\[c\]ontrary to positivist conceptions, records aren’t neutral
by-products of activity; they are discursive agents through which power
is made manifest. Records both produce and are produced by violent
acts’.[^10Chapter8_7] In addition, the structures and institutions within which the
records are collected, preserved and made accessible (or not) are far
from neutral either. Of course, many institutional archives do not
expect to be so as they have specific remits and policies reflecting
their organization’s priorities and aims; non-institutional archives too
may be aimed at collecting the history and experience of specific
communities. Many institutional archives, however, still largely
represent dominant cultures and social norms and also serve their
interest, whether intentionally or not. For an archivist to embrace the
role of ‘neutral custodian’ thus constitutes an acceptance of the
status-quo and the hierarchies and exclusions this entails.

Over the last twenty years, Jimerson has been one of a number of
prominent voices arguing for social justice to be an acknowledged
component of archival work. In a 2007 article entitled ‘Archives for
all: Professional responsibility and social justice’, he stated:

> Archivists have only recently begun to re-examine their assumptions
> about the neutrality and objectivity of archives. In the ‘information
> age’, knowledge is power. This power gives those who determine what
> records will be preserved for future generations a significant degree
> of influence. Archivists must embrace this power, rather than
> continuing to deny its existence.[^10Chapter8_8]

In 2013, the late Mark A. Greene, a Fellow and past president of the
Society of American Archivists (SAA), used the society’s annual
conference and a special issue of its journal *The American Archivist*
to enter into a debate with Jimerson around what he called ‘social
justice as an archival imperative’. Greene argued for a neutral,
impartial approach to collecting so as to enable archivists to gain the
confidence of donors across the social and political spectrum and thus
to collect a wide range of records to represent a broad cross-section of
society.[^10Chapter8_9] Greene’s article was justly criticized by others in the
archives studies community, notably Caswell and scholar of archives and
human rights violations Mario H. Ramírez. They challenged both Greene’s
argument and his approach of addressing Jimerson directly in an
SAA-centered debate, arguing that this situated the question in the
homosocial context of white professional men to the implicit exclusion
of scholars, subjects and users of archives belonging to marginalized
groups disadvantaged by existing hierarchies.[^10Chapter8_10]

The responses to Greene are representative of a strong tendency in
archival scholarship towards the rethinking of archival principles and
the reform of archival praxis informed by social justice aims, as Flinn
and Alexander’s special issue also demonstrates. Attitudes to these
issues vary among archival practitioners less involved in scholarly
debates and/or activist movements, however. Some may still feel strongly
attached to their training in traditional methods which emphasized their
‘neutral custodian’ role, considering their first priority to be the
preservation and safekeeping of the archives in their care; the remit
and priorities of their institution may well see this as their role too.
Many others, however, are actively seeking to use their influence to
make their archives more accessible, equitable and just.[^10Chapter8_11] For
instance, where institutional constraints and collection policies allow
this, many archives are consciously broadening their acquisitions so
their archives can begin to represent communities that have historically
been marginalized. In 2022, the Utrechts Archief, Utrecht’s local
authority archive, participated in the celebration of the city’s 900^th^
anniversary with a high-profile exhibition entitled ‘Gekomen om te
blijven’ \[Come to stay\], showcasing the stories of past and present
inhabitants of the city through portraits, oral history, performance and
interactive initiatives such as a walking tour.[^10Chapter8_12] A significant
proportion of these stories reflected migrant experiences from the
(very) recent and more distant past, publicly recognizing the influence
of migration on local history through the ages.

Many projects intended to make archival holdings more inclusive
incorporate participatory practices, where members of the relevant
community are invited to contribute to the construction of the
collection. This often happens at the level of record descriptions to
ensure that these are free from the errors and insensitivities that can
be written in when the archivist does not know the community and its
customs. This is far from the only way that affected communities may be
invited to participate in archives, however: methods for participatory
recordkeeping, curation, appraisal, cataloging and description have been
set out by a range of archives scholars and professionals. Edward Benoit
III and Alexandra Eveleigh published their edited collection
*Participatory Archives: Theory and Practice* in 2019. Other key
practical contributors in this field include Lauren Haberstock, Isto
Huvila and Michelle Caswell.[^10Chapter8_13] Increasingly, participatory approaches
are now also gaining support from professional associations such as the
Erfgoed Academie in the Netherlands and the Archives and Records
Association in the UK.

Digital advances clearly offer new opportunities to implement
participatory archival practices. They facilitate the recruitment of
community participants and create new spaces for collaboration, for
instance through digital catalogues. Digital access also contributes
significantly to making collections available to the relevant community
and beyond. This potential for growth does, however, also increase
responsibility to ensure that these projects are carried out in a way
that appropriately recognizes the labour of community participants,
including through remuneration. One project that takes very seriously
both the potential of the digital to facilitate community participation
and the responsibilities this brings, is the South Asian American
Digital Archive (SAADA). Community participation is a founding and
essential principle of this digital, open access project conceived by
Samip Mallick and Caswell. Since its foundation in 2008, SAADA has been
actively collecting materials relating to the history and experiences of
the South Asian American community. The digital platform aids the
visibility both of the archives and the communities it seeks to
represent and actively recognizes and honors the contribution made by
the community, as this chapter will go on to demonstrate.

## Oppressive legacies in archival praxis

While social justice-oriented practices such as the participatory
approaches outlined above are gaining ground across the archives sector,
a key question for many archives professionals is whether it is enough
to incorporate such innovations into their existing praxis, or whether
more extensive and fundamental change is required. Jimerson argued that
archivists should do more than ‘respond to the challenges outside their
repositories’: they should also be re-examining ‘their own professional
practices’.[^10Chapter8_14] Many accepted principles of archival praxis are
themselves rooted in and reflective of social hierarchies and complicit
in systems that, at best, may fail to recognize alternative structures
and, at worst, oppress them. Jimerson gives the example of the principle
of provenance which ‘reflects assumptions about organizational
structures and hierarchies that privilege those in power and those with
a recognized collectivity’.[^10Chapter8_15] Archival scholar Anna Robinson-Sweet,
in an influential 2018 article in which she explicitly called for
archivists to become ‘reparations activists’, adds that biases are found
in ‘every archival practice from appraisal to preservation to
access’.[^10Chapter8_16]

Jimerson points out that most of these questions around the structural
hierarchies that define archival praxis arise from the fact that
‘\[a\]rchival principles and functions developed largely in the context
of nineteenth-century bureaucratic states’[^10Chapter8_17] and much still current
and established archival theory and praxis remains rooted directly in
such recordkeeping systems. Two texts, in particular, remain
foundational to present-day archival praxis. The *Handleiding voor het
ordenen en beschrijven van archieven* \[*Manual for the arrangement and
description of archives*\] (1898), known colloquially as the *Dutch
Manual*, was produced by Dutch local authority archivists Samuel Muller,
Johan Feith and Robert Fruin.[^10Chapter8_18] The *Manual of Archive
Administration* (1922) was the work of Sir Hilary Jenkinson,[^10Chapter8_19] a
long-standing staff member in the British Public Record Office (PRO),
the precursor to the present-day UK National Archives (TNA).

It is extremely relevant that both of these works, which set out
principles of archival arrangement and administration that are still
considered essential, developed from the practices of official and
governmental recordkeeping. It explains the organization of archival
records into hierarchical structures based on a single, defined creator
– a person or a department. Importantly, it also explains why records
tend to be preserved in the same system in which they were supplied.
Governing bodies would pass on to their archives records that were no
longer in active use, but for retrieval and reference it was logical to
preserve them within the system in which they were used. The specific
hierarchies which informed the creation and use of the records are
therefore reflected and preserved in these systems. The preservation of
the records was obviously in the interest of the institution as well as
in a wider public interest as it documented practices and decisions made
by the governing institution.

This system, while it functioned well in its context, produces a number
of problems when it is expanded across archives with different aims and
priorities. Many of these spring from the fact that access was
originally not a primary concern: it was most likely that the records
would be consulted by members of the organization or by others already
familiar with the organizational structure, such as staff from other
government departments or historians, for instance. The key aim, then,
was preservation for reference if and when required. This context shows
the roots of the conception of the archivist’s role as a neutral and
even passive one.

Recordkeeping is an important element in enabling transparency and open
government. For many archives today, however, the situation has become
radically different from that described in the *Dutch Manual* and the
*Manual of Archive Administration* as access to records has become much
more central to their functioning. Increasing access, moreover, has come
to mean significantly more than simply producing the records in a
reading room in response to a request. As it is acknowledged that
records are of use to wider communities than have traditionally accessed
archives, active steps must be taken to make them available to this
larger spectrum of users.

Digitization has provided a broad range of opportunities in this area.
It should be acknowledged that digitization of archival collections is a
resource-intensive process that is not without physical risk for
collection items. The overall advantages generally outweigh these risks,
however, as digitization can help with storage and preservation and can
increase the scope of collections as digital copies as well as
born-digital materials can be collected. It can also significantly
increase access. As archivists update their praxis to engage with the
potential of the digital, however, their work can also highlight ways in
which other aspects of archival praxis may no longer be relevant or
suitable in the present day.

## Perpetuating oppressive structures in digitization

The *Dutch Manual* and the *Manual of Archive Administration* were
produced at a time when both the Netherlands and Great Britain
maintained significant colonial interests. The administrative systems on
which they rest therefore reflect the systematic hierarchies of
colonizing nations. These histories are highly relevant for modern-day
archivists seeking to address the ways their collections reflect social
injustice, as highlighted by Charles Jeurgens and Michael Karabinos, two
archival scholars from the Netherlands whose work examines the
persistence of colonial legacies in archives. In their 2020 article
‘Paradoxes of curating colonial memory’, they highlight the specific
impact of these contexts on a digital project.[^10Chapter8_20]

The article examines the digitization by the Dutch National Archives
(Nationaal Archief, NA) of its collection of wills made by employees of
the Dutch East India Company (Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie, VOC).
The digitization project was an important development in rendering the
canon of Dutch national history more inclusive by representing more
diverse stories and making these more widely accessible. The VOC, a key
agent in creating the wealth of the Early Modern Netherlands, represents
the violent colonial exploitation on which this prosperity was built.
The wills reflect an interesting parallel history of the VOC as they are
made by ordinary working people embarking on employment in which death
was a serious risk. In addition, the documents regularly feature women
and people of color as important actors in different roles – sometimes
as subordinates or indeed property, but also as legatees and witnesses,
for instance.

The design of the project counted on the original nineteenth-century
catalog to continue to act as the primary finding aid for the collection
in its digital form. However, this catalog named only the white men who
were the testators and did not include women or people of color. Because
the implications of this had not been adequately considered in the
project design, the aim of increasing inclusivity was undermined by the
oppressive structural hierarchies imposed through the original archival
structure. Jeurgens and Karabinos explain: ‘The real problem in the
context of our discussion is the perpetuation of this nineteenth century
\[*sic*\] archival worldview in a new, revitalized digital archival
infrastructure: it renders women and indigenous people invisible and is
an example of epistemological inertia’.[^10Chapter8_21]

I suggest this ‘epistemological inertia’ may be connected to a continued
reliance on a notion of archival neutrality, which meant that a
challenge to the existing finding aid was not incorporated into the
project plan. The nineteenth-century archivists who cataloged this
collection were evidently not neutral: they imposed their own
contemporary hierarchical worldview on historical records.[^10Chapter8_22] Jeurgens
and Karabinos acknowledge earlier observations made by Nathan Mudyi
Sentence, convener of the Australian Society of Archivists, Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Special Interest Group, when they point out
that this is a case in which the failure to challenge the work of the
earlier archivists worked to support ‘the oppressive archival
infrastructure from the past’.[^10Chapter8_23] Students of archival studies at the
University of Amsterdam, under the supervision of Jeurgens and Mrinalini
Luthra, have since conducted a project using digital tools to highlight
the presence of women and non-European people in the collection. This
project, which had the support of the Nationaal Archief, offered an
alternative to ‘epistemological inertia’ by directly counteracting the
bias of the nineteenth-century catalog and demonstrating how inclusive
practices can give a new perspective on existing records.[^10Chapter8_24]

## Challenging exclusion from digital records

It is evident, then, that digitization on its own is not sufficient to
increase access to and use of the archival record, including for new
users, in the present day. As the case of VOC testaments shows,
digitization in itself can in fact perpetuate a historical injustice. As
archivists seek to increase access to specific records and collections
they must consider the potential impact that these may have on a wider
community of users. This is particularly relevant when records are
activated for and by a community of users who are marginalized and
disadvantaged by the records and the systems they represent.

This question was a crucial one for the staff – historians, archivists
and many other professionals – involved in the creation of the online
Find & Connect service, designed to help Forgotten Australians and
Former Child Migrants find and access records relating to their
experiences in out-of-home ‘care’. These records contained important
information about their subjects’ personal history but when they were
created they were generally not intended to be seen by the subjects
themselves. It is now accepted that these record subjects have a right
to their personal information and Find & Connect was conceived to enable
them to access it.

While the intended users of the service were likely to be strongly
personally invested in finding their own records and accessing the
information they contained, they might also have lower levels of
literacy and digital literacy and may well have had no previous
experience with historical records. In addition, there was a risk of
alienating this audience because these particular records may contain
offensive language and because frequent redactions may suggest that
personal information is being withheld from the person concerned – when
the withholding of information had often already been a traumatic aspect
of their time in ‘care’. Simply digitizing catalogs and records to make
them findable online would not be enough to reach these users. If they
discovered their records through online search engines, thus bypassing
the Find & Connect service home page and the contextual information it
offered, the content of the records alone was likely to have a shocking
and hurtful impact. It was important, therefore, that the records were
made accessible alongside sufficient explanation and context to enable
users to find and interpret the information they were seeking without
causing further offense or hurt through careless presentation.

Find & Connect project team members Michael Jones and Cate O’Neill
explicitly argued that cases like this demonstrate that ‘archivists need
to be conscious of the social justice element of their work’. This means
that they

> should regularly shift their focus away from the individual
> collections and repositories with which they work towards the needs of
> individual people and communities. The sector needs to embrace notions
> of joint heritage and shared ownership, and change practices so that
> new users can be included and valued in the community of records.[^10Chapter8_25]

Centering users in this way requires care, consideration, active work
and a willingness to challenge the way things have been done, at the
various stages of record creation, recordkeeping, archival preservation
and access.

## Finding postcustodial alternatives through digital platforms

The Find & Connect service innovates by bringing together existing
records and digital opportunities to create a user-focused archives with
a social justice aim, without necessarily challenging underlying
archival principles. A comparable approach has been used successfully to
support the documentation of a range of different marginalized histories
and to increase access for affected communities. These initiatives
challenge the oppressive and gatekeeping structures of existing systems
and institutions through an approach known as ‘postcustodialism’.

Postcustodialism offers an alternative to the custodial nature of many
traditional archives, meaning the storage of records in physical
repositories. Storing and preserving records in specific repositories
makes them more difficult to access for users who may have to cross
borders to reach the archives, for instance, as the cost of travel as
well as matters such as visa regulations may be prohibitive. The
archival buildings themselves and the rules that must be followed within
them to preserve and protect the documents can also intimidate users who
may feel unwelcome in such an environment. These factors may also deter
record donation: a potential donor may think that their contribution
will not be valued by an archives that they feel does not represent or
serve them or their community.

The South Asian American Digital Archive (SAADA), already mentioned, and
the Early Caribbean Digital Archive (ECDA) are two examples of digital,
open access postcustodial projects which are seeking solutions to these
questions. The two projects’ approaches are adjusted for the kinds of
records they collect: in the case of ECDA, these go back centuries,
while many records donated to SAADA are more recent and closely related
to the donor’s own experiences, pertaining to themselves or to close
family and other connections. For both, however, it is a key priority to
expand the canonical record to include marginalized voices and
experiences in a context of ongoing racist exclusion. The digital
platforms that make these records findable and accessible take explicit
responsibility for engaging with these present-day contexts.

ECDA is focused on offering access to existing collection items from
different archives. It comprises materials relating to the
pre-twentieth-century history of the Caribbean, often drawn from
custodial repositories that can be difficult to access physically – not
least because colonial records may well still be held in the colonizing
nations. While the materials are frequently authored by Europeans, ECDA
‘aims to use digital tools to "remix" the archive and foreground the
centrality and creativity of enslaved and free African, Afro-creole, and
Indigenous peoples in the Caribbean world’.[^10Chapter8_26] In this way, without
altering the records themselves, ECDA’s structures of access and its
presentation of records work to challenge the colonial hierarchies
within which many of the original records were produced and held beyond
the reach of affected communities.

As well as increasing the visibility and wider recognition of the South
Asian American community and its history in the United States, SAADA’s
postcustodial approach was designed to encourage donations. As donors
are able to keep the original records while a digital version is stored
in the archive, the records can be shared without taking rights away
from the donors. Founders Mallick and Caswell explain that this was a
conscious decision to redress existing inequalities in the archival
record. They state that:

> Traditionally, archivists have neither actively gone out to recruit
> donors of materials from marginalised groups, nor have they emphasised
> the importance of such records in their appraisal decisions. The
> result is a horribly lopsided archival record that amplifies the
> voices of the powerful and further silences the marginalised.[^10Chapter8_27]

By contrast, they explain: ‘A community member who feels his or her
story has a place in the archives is more likely to donate physical
materials, tell other community members to use the archives and make a
monetary gift’.[^10Chapter8_28] Such practical considerations also highlight that a
project with a social justice aim can be a viable alternative to
established archives and their praxis.

## Rejecting existing structures in new digital archives

For certain records, histories and movements, however, it may be found
that existing systems and institutions are too complicit in oppression
to be a suitable platform or repository. The digital cataloging system
Mukurtu was developed specifically to contain information about
Indigenous heritage, as an alternative to existing cataloging software
based on hierarchical principles which replicated structures of colonial
theft and oppression and did not respect the requirements and
restrictions of cultural and religious practices that may exist around
Indigenous artifacts.

The question of institutional and structural complicity is also
particularly relevant in the context of systemic racism. In 2015,
Ramírez returned to Greene’s 2013 argument for archivists’ impartiality,
focusing his critique on the assumptions of whiteness that continue to
characterize much of the archival profession in the global north and not
least in the United States. Partly because workers within the profession
are still disproportionately white, it is possible for them to make
assumptions about neutrality that are informed by their own familiarity
with the status-quo. Seeking social justice in archival work, therefore,
has to include an examination of how systemic racism informs both
existing records and archival praxis and archivists’ own positionality
and relationship to these. As Ramírez states:

> By questioning whiteness and its semantic markers (such as tradition,
> neutrality, and objectivity) and having honest dialogues about how we
> as a profession and individuals perpetuate inequality, we can liberate
> ourselves to do the real work of documenting history to our fullest
> capacity — in turn, inaugurating a praxis that listens '… for the
> voices of those who are marginalised or excluded by prevailing
> relations of power'.[^10Chapter8_29]

In other words, it is not Greene’s version of impartiality that best
allows for the collection of a broad record of society as a whole;
rather, acknowledging and challenging inequality and the structures that
perpetuate it will enable archivists better to fulfill their role of
collecting the records that ‘document history’.

Robinson-Sweet also addresses how structures of racism are embedded in
archival systems. She points to the work of US archivist, ethnographer
and anthropologist Jarrett Drake to establish forms of archival praxis
that centralize Black communities and their experience of police
violence in the United States. Robinson-Sweet notes that Drake’s
examination of the Danziger Bridge murders in 2005, when New Orleans
police fatally shot two unarmed African-American civilians and wounded
four others, demonstrates how, ‘in a society built on a foundation of
systemic racist violence, the context of the archives is racism and
white supremacy’.[^10Chapter8_30]

This understanding informed Drake’s ‘decision not to partner with an
existing archives or library’ in the building of the online People’s
Archive of Police Violence in Cleveland in 2015.[^10Chapter8_31] In the context of
the Black Lives Matter protests that followed the murder of George Floyd
in 2020, the US-wide People’s Archive of Police Violence was also
created. Both projects invite participants to share their own
experiences related to police violence. The website of the US-wide
archive argues that statistics relating to deaths from police violence
act as ‘dehumanization \[which\] serves a purpose, to distance the
viewers/readers from the very real impact of systemic racism. This
archive seeks to combat this by sharing intimately the personal
experiences of the People’. It promises that ‘All stories are added to
the archive as they are received; we do not change or edit submissions
other than to scrub the identifying data from files’.[^10Chapter8_32] Both websites
have a ‘Collections’ section, though at the time of writing this is
still under development for the US-wide site. Contributions are unedited
and no hierarchy is imposed. Users may browse all contributions,
choosing to click through to the full contribution based on the title
and opening lines, and often a date. Both websites invite users to
contribute their own stories. Through the assurance on the US-wide site
that the record will not be interfered with, the website/archives
positions itself in a role close to that of the ‘neutral custodian’.
The motivation behind both archives, however, is inherently political:
to return power over records to people whose marginalization has made
them subject to the violent expression of systemic oppression.

Robinson-Sweet quotes Drake’s comment that ‘\[t\]he unbearable whiteness
and patriarchy of traditional archives demand that new archives for
black lives emerge and sustain themselves as spaces for trauma,
transcendence, and transformation’.[^10Chapter8_33] The work of Ramírez, Drake and
others demonstrate that one archivist’s perceived ‘neutrality’ is
‘unbearable whiteness and patriarchy’ to others and, at least as
importantly, to large communities of potential archives users. As with
the Find & Connect service, to reach and represent such communities
requires a radical rethinking of the theories and praxis that have
previously excluded them.

## Conclusions: Rethinking praxis in digital practice

This chapter has given an indication both of how the pervasiveness of
oppressive structures and hierarchies in archives can penetrate into
projects intended to make progressive and innovative use of digital
developments, and how the potential of the digital can be mobilized to
challenge these problematic legacies. Examples such as the VOC
testaments digitization project and the Find & Connect service highlight
how digital archival initiatives make it even more impossible and indeed
unethical for archivists to ‘hid\[e\] behind a veil of innocence,
neutrality, and impartiality’. While Greene saw the notion that social
justice should be an ‘archival imperative’ as a threat to professional
principles, Robinson-Sweet takes a more positive view of archivists’
power for good. As she puts it: ‘Luckily, archivists have agency and
expertise, and so have the ability to activate archives in the service
of reparative justice’.[^10Chapter8_34] For her, archival professionalism includes
embracing the possibilities offered by archival work to innovate and
progress to help make archives fairer and more just for broader
communities of users.

The examples discussed in this chapter demonstrate how the digital can
provide valuable opportunities in this area. They also show that such
progressive work can only be achieved, however, if digital innovation is
carried out thoughtfully and sensitively. The wider access that digital
archives facilitate heightens the responsibility to center the needs and
experience of record subjects and users, through collaboration and
consultation as well as consideration. It is clear that the archives
community, in its theoretical and practical work, is actively engaging
with such questions, but much remains to be done. In a profession where
many struggle with constant resource constraints, these developments
must be actively and practically supported by professional archival
organizations to ensure that this work of rethinking, innovation and
reform can be successfully incorporated as a necessary part of archival
praxis.

## References

*A People’s Archive of Police Violence*,
[peoplesarchiveofpoliceviolence.com](http://peoplesarchiveofpoliceviolence.com)

*A People’s Archive of Police Violence in Cleveland*,
[archivingpoliceviolence.org](https://archivingpoliceviolence.org/)

Bastian, Jeanette A. ‘Taking Custody, Giving Access: A Postcustodial
Role for a New Century’, *Archivaria* 53 (2002): 76–93.

Caswell, Michelle. ‘Not Just Between Us: A Riposte to Mark Greene’, *The
American Archivist* 76.2 (2013): 605–608.

Caswell, Michelle and Mallick, Samip. ‘Collecting the Easily Missed
Stories: Digital Participatory Microhistory and the South Asian American
Digital Archive’, *Archives and Manuscripts* 42.1 (2014): 73–86.

Cook, Terry. ‘Remembering the Future: Appraisal of Records and the Role
of Archives in Constructing Social Memory’ in Francis X. Blouin and
William G. Rosenberg (eds), *Archives, Documentation and Institutions of
Social Memory: Essays from the Sawyer Seminar*, Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, 2007,169–182.

Flinn, Andrew and Alexander, Ben. ‘‘‘Humanizing an Inevitability
Political Craft’’: Introduction to the Special Issue on Archiving
Activism and Activist Archiving’, *Archival Science* 15 (2015): 329–335.

‘Gekomen om te blijven’, *Utrechts Archief*,
[hetutrechtsarchief.nl/ontdekken/tentoonstellingen/tentoonstellingen-uit-het-verleden/724-gekomen-om-te-blijven](https://hetutrechtsarchief.nl/ontdekken/tentoonstellingen/tentoonstellingen-uit-het-verleden/724-gekomen-om-te-blijven)

Greene, Mark A. ‘A Critique Of Social Justice as an Archival Imperative:
What Is It We’re Doing That’s All That Important?’, *The American
Archivist* 76.2 (2013): 302–334.

Haberstock, Lauren. ‘Participatory Description: Decolonizing Descriptive
Methodologies in Archives’, *Archival Science* 20 (2020): 125–138.

Harris, Verne. ‘The Archival Sliver: Power, Memory, and Archives in
South Africa’, *Archival Science* 2 (2002): 63–86.

Huvila, Isto. ‘Participatory Archive: Towards Decentralised Curation,
Radical User Orientation, And Broader Contextualisation Of Records
Management’, *Archival Science* 8 (2008): 15–36.

Janssen, Flore. ‘Engagement with Decolonizing Archival Practices in the
UK Archives Sector: A Survey of Archives Workers’ Attitudes’, *Archives
and Records* 44.1 (2023): 95–119.

Jenkinson, Hilary. *A Manual of Archive Administration*, Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1922.

Jeurgens, Charles and Karabinos, Michael. ‘Paradoxes of Curating
Colonial Memory’, *Archival Science* 20 (2020): 199–220.

Jimerson, Randall. ‘Archives for All: Professional Responsibility and
Social Justice’, *The American Archivist* 70.2 (2007): 252–281.

Jones, Michael and O’Neill, Cate. ‘Identity, Records and Archival
Evidence: Exploring the Needs of Forgotten Australians and Former Child
Migrants’, *Archives & Records* 35.2 (2014): 110–125.

Muller, Samuel, Feith, Johan and Fruin, Robert. *Manual for the
Arrangement and Description of Archives*, Chicago: Society of American
Archivists, 2003 \[1898\].

Ramírez, Mario H. ‘Being Assumed not to Be: A Critique of Whiteness as
an Archival Imperative’, *The American Archivist* 78.2 (2015): 339–356.

Robinson-Sweet, Anna. ‘Truth and Reconciliation: Archivists as
Reparations Activists’, *The American Archivist* 81.1 (2018): 23–37.

Society of American Archivists. ‘Archivy’, *Dictionary of Archives
Terminology*,
[dictionary.archivists.org/entry/archivy.html](https://dictionary.archivists.org/entry/archivy.html)

Stoler, Ann Laura. *Along the Archival Grain*, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2008.

‘The Early Caribbean Digital Archive’, *ECDA: Early Caribbean Digital
Archive*, Northeastern University, 2022,
[ecda.northeastern.edu](https://ecda.northeastern.edu/)

[^10Chapter8_1]: On the term ‘archivy’, see the Society of American Archivists’,
    *Dictionary of Archives Terminology*,
    [dictionary.archivists.org/entry/archivy.html](https://dictionary.archivists.org/entry/archivy.html).

[^10Chapter8_2]: Randall C. Jimerson, ‘Archives for All: Professional
    Responsibility and Social Justice’, *The American Archivist* 70.2
    (2007): 270.

[^10Chapter8_3]: See Jeanette A. Bastian, ‘Taking Custody, Giving Access: A
    Postcustodial Role for a New Century’, *Archivaria* 53 (2002):
    76–93.

[^10Chapter8_4]: Andrew Flinn and Ben Alexander, ‘‘‘Humanizing an Inevitability
    Political Craft’’: Introduction to the Special Issue on Archiving
    Activism and Activist Archiving’, *Archival Science* 15 (2015): 331.

[^10Chapter8_5]: Terry Cook, ‘Remembering the Future: Appraisal of Records and the
    Role of Archives in Constructing Social Memory’ in Francis X. Blouin
    and William G. Rosenberg (eds), *Archives, Documentation and
    Institutions of Social Memory: Essays from the Sawyer Seminar*, Ann
    Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2007, 170.

[^10Chapter8_6]: The strong emphasis on custody of archives is central to Hilary
    Jenkinson, *A Manual of Archive Administration*, Oxford: Clarendon
    Press, 1922.

[^10Chapter8_7]: Michelle Caswell, ‘Not Just Between Us: A Riposte to Mark Greene’,
    *The American Archivist* 76 (2013): 605.

[^10Chapter8_8]: Jimerson, ‘Archives for All’: 254.

[^10Chapter8_9]: Mark A. Greene, ‘A Critique of Social Justice as an Archival
    Imperative: What Is It We’re Doing That’s All That Important?’, *The
    American Archivist* 76.2 (2013): 302–334.

[^10Chapter8_10]: See Caswell, ‘Not Just Between Us’; and Mario H. Ramírez, ‘Being
    Assumed not to Be: A Critique of Whiteness as an Archival
    Imperative’, *The American Archivist* 78.2 (2015): 339–356.

[^10Chapter8_11]: I discovered examples of both attitudes during my dissertation
    research for my MA in Archives and Records Management (UCL, 2021).
    Some of the results of this project have been published in my
    article Flore Janssen, ‘Engagement with Decolonizing Archival
    Practices in the UK Archives Sector: A Survey of Archives Workers’
    Attitudes’, *Archives and Records* 44.1 (2023): 95–119.

[^10Chapter8_12]: ‘Gekomen om te blijven’, *Utrechts Archief*,
    [hetutrechtsarchief.nl/ontdekken/tentoonstellingen/tentoonstellingen-uit-het-verleden/724-gekomen-om-te-blijven](https://hetutrechtsarchief.nl/ontdekken/tentoonstellingen/tentoonstellingen-uit-het-verleden/724-gekomen-om-te-blijven)

[^10Chapter8_13]: See Lauren Haberstock, ‘Participatory Description: Decolonizing
    Descriptive Methodologies in Archives’, *Archival Science* 20
    (2020): 125–138; and Isto Huvila, ‘Participatory Archive: Towards
    Decentralised Curation, Radical User Orientation, and Broader
    Contextualisation of Records Management’, *Archival Science* 8
    (2008): 15–36. Caswell’s work engages with a wide range of
    participatory projects, including the South Asian American Digital
    Archive which is discussed in this chapter.

[^10Chapter8_14]: Jimerson, ‘Archives for All’: 275–276.

[^10Chapter8_15]: Jimerson, ‘Archives for All’: 276.

[^10Chapter8_16]: Anna Robinson-Sweet, ‘Truth and Reconciliation: Archivists as
    Reparations Activists’, *The American Archivist* 81.1 (2018): 24 and
    33.

[^10Chapter8_17]: Jimerson, ‘Archives for All’: 276.

[^10Chapter8_18]: Samuel Muller, Johan Feith and Robert Fruin, *Manual for the
    Arrangement and Description of Archives*, Chicago: Society of
    American Archivists, 2003 \[1898\].

[^10Chapter8_19]: Jenkinson, *A Manual of Archive Administration*.

[^10Chapter8_20]: Charles Jeurgens and Michael Karabinos, ‘Paradoxes of Curating
    Colonial Memory’, *Archival Science* 20 (2020): 199–220.

[^10Chapter8_21]: Jeurgens and Karabinos, ‘Paradoxes of Curating Colonial Memory’:
    214.

[^10Chapter8_22]: It is important here to recognize Ann Laura Stoler’s key
    contribution in challenging the notion of neutrality in colonial
    archives. See for instance Ann Laura Stoler, *Along the Archival
    Grain*, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008.

[^10Chapter8_23]: Jeurgens and Karabinos, ‘Paradoxes of Curating Colonial Memory’:
    214.

[^10Chapter8_24]: ‘Unsilencing the VOC Testaments’, *Create – Creative Amsterdam:
    an E-Humanities Perspective*,
    <https://www.create.humanities.uva.nl/education/unsilencing-the-archive/>

[^10Chapter8_25]: Michael Jones and Cate O’Neill, ‘Identity, Records and Archival
    Evidence: Exploring the Needs of Forgotten Australians and Former
    Child Migrants’, *Archives & Records* 35.2 (2014): 111.

[^10Chapter8_26]: ‘The Early Caribbean Digital Archive’, *ECDA: Early Caribbean
    Digital Archive*, Northeastern University, 2022,
    [ecda.northeastern.edu](https://ecda.northeastern.edu/).

[^10Chapter8_27]: Michelle Caswell and Samip Mallick, ‘Collecting the Easily Missed
    Stories: Digital Participatory Microhistory and the South Asian
    American Digital Archive’, *Archives and Manuscripts* 42.1 (2014):
    79.

[^10Chapter8_28]: Caswell and Mallick, ‘Collecting the Easily Missed Stories’: 83.

[^10Chapter8_29]: Ramírez, ‘Being Assumed not to Be’: 352. The quotation in this
    passage is from ‘The Archival Sliver: Power, Memory, and Archives in
    South Africa’ by Verne Harris, *Archival Science* 2 (2002): 63–86.
    The aim of Harris’s article as stated in its abstract is to ‘appeal
    to archivists to enchant their work \[…\] by turning always towards
    the call of and for justice’.

[^10Chapter8_30]: Robinson-Sweet, ‘Truth and Reconciliation’: 33

[^10Chapter8_31]: Robinson-Sweet, ‘Truth and Reconciliation’: 35. See also *A
    People’s Archive of Police Violence in Cleveland*,
    [archivingpoliceviolence.org](https://archivingpoliceviolence.org/).

[^10Chapter8_32]: *A People’s Archive of Police Violence*,
    [peoplesarchiveofpoliceviolence.com](http://peoplesarchiveofpoliceviolence.com).

[^10Chapter8_33]: Robinson-Sweet, ‘Truth and Reconciliation’: 35.

[^10Chapter8_34]: Robinson-Sweet, ‘Truth and Reconciliation’: 27.
