---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 09. AFTERWORD: COROLLARY RECORDS, PRECARITY AND CARE

### MICHELLE CASWELL

The essays in this volume serve as a powerful reminder that archives are
not only about the past; they are about the work that needs to be done
in the present to enact a future conducive to our mutual survival.
Global in scope, the chapters demonstrate how organizers are finding
creative ways to document their own activism, to steward the records
they generate, and to activate these records for new works of art and
resistance. From Afghan women’s Instagram posts to posters left behind
by occupiers of People’s Parks, the records described in this volume
assert ‘We Were Here’. With careful archival intervention, these records
assert ‘We Will Always Be Here’. Taken together, the chapters reveal how
art, activism, and archives are mutually constituted; records get
created as a form of protest, protest is an art in that generates its
own records, records get activated for new forms of art and resistance.
With thoughtful stewardship and outreach, the cycle continues *ad
infinitum* in a Möbius strip of creation, consumption, and care, forming
the basis of liberatory memory work.

Liberatory memory work, in the words of the Co-Directors of UCLA’s
Community Archives Lab:

> empowers vulnerable communities to enact their own temporalities, to
> represent themselves autonomously, and to activate records to
> redistribute material resources more equitably. Liberatory memory work
> recognizes and leverages the power of emotion to challenge and
> transform existing knowledge systems; such memory work simultaneously
> dismantles oppressive archives and imagines and strives toward
> liberatory practices. What is at stake, ultimately, is not just how we
> remember the past, but how we distribute power in the present.[^11Chapter9_1]

These chapters give us case studies of liberatory memory work across
context and cultures, involving a diverse assemblage of actors, archival
praxes, and information architectures. Community archives reflect the
ontologies and epistemologies of the communities they serve and
represent and as such, no two are exactly alike. Yet despite these
disparate contexts, commonalities emerge around three major themes:
corollary records, precarity, and care.

The records created, archived, and activated in these chapters are what
I have termed ‘corollary records’, that is, records that document a
parallel, precedented moment in the past that speaks directly to the
present.[^11Chapter9_2] Corollary records constitute a blueprint for activists,
providing crucial information on the success (and failure) of strategies
and tactics from the past, so that organizers do not have to reinvent
the wheel with each intervention. But records can only do this if they
have been preserved, described, and made accessible. Rebecka Taves
Sheffield’s important distinction between record making and record
keeping, cited by Ann-Katrine Schmidt Nielsen in chapter five of this
volume, is key here.[^11Chapter9_3] Activists *make* records, but those records
must be actively stewarded if they are to constitute archives. Archives
(always with an ‘s’ from an archival studies perspective) are
collections of records, preserved and described, rather than metaphors
(as they are often characterized in the humanities). The tension between
these two perspectives on archive(s) surfaces here, as authors work
through the very material concerns of how to preserve *stuff* over time.
It is abundantly clear on these pages that digital records are simply
material *stuff* in different form, requiring material infrastructure
with its own practical and ethical challenges.

As in all discussions from critical archival studies, power forms the
backdrop through which we interpret these cases and their attendant
challenges. Who has the power to create records? Who has the power to
preserve them? What resources (financial and temporal) are required to
care for them? What forms of expertise? And who gets to access them and
why? And conversely, who *cannot* access them and why? The authors in
this edited volume show how marginalized subjects can reclaim their
power through record creation and, to a lesser extent, through archival
interventions that stewards these records, once created, across space
and time.

Intimately tied to power, precarity surfaces as a looming threat across
several chapters in this volume. First and foremost, the people whose
activism is documented are driven by a sense of the precarity of their
own lives due to oppression and marginalization. The continual state of
precarity brought about by late-stage capitalism, white supremacy,
hetero-patriarchy, and ableism propels these archival interventions.
Yet, from a critical archival studies perspective, crucial questions
remain: How can we ensure that records documenting activism do not
further jeopardize already-precarious record creators and record
subjects by exposing them to additional state surveillance and its
attendant regimes of policing, incarceration, and violence? How can we
ensure that we are not placing these records in corporate-owned content
silos that monetize records of suffering, rendering them commodities
that will only be preserved for as long as they generate revenue? How
can we ensure that we are not placing digital records as data in servers
that soak up fossil fuels, contributing to the climate crisis? In other
words, how can we build our own autonomous archival infrastructures that
simultaneously allow for both representation and refusal? For answers to
these questions, we should turn away from the dominant practices and
politics of academic and government repositories and towards the
possibilities presented by marginalized identity-based community
archives, which have been balancing visibility with protection since
time immemorial. These independent grassroots memory organizations make
plain that the right to be remembered and the right to be forgotten are
two sides of the same coin, both hinging on the right to make autonomous
archival decisions. Practices developed by minoritized identity-based
community archives remind us that the impulse to be remembered is
dangerous and risky for many.

From the vantage of critical archival studies, it naturally follows that
a precarious record creator produces a precarious record. The very
affordances of born-digital technologies amplify the precarity of the
records they engender; as more people have the means to create records
and share them on social media, fewer have the means or expertise to
steward those records over time. Records decay by default. It takes
active intervention to preserve them over time. Social media platforms
purposefully obfuscate these facts, leading users to conflate immediate
access and audience with long-term stewardship. The essays in this
volume show that this work of stewardship takes many different forms,
some carried out by professionally trained archivists, and some,
notably, not. In fact, many of the essays in this volume challenge
dominant Western professional archival practices that are themselves
rooted in oppressive systems.

Dominant Western archival practice focuses on the meticulous details of
how best to preserve records rather than catalyzing their activation.
Professional archivists in the dominant tradition, now waking up to the
worlds of record making and record keeping outside of bureaucracies, are
asking, ’We have stewarded these records, now what? How do we activate
them?’ The authors in this volume flip this dilemma, instead asking: ‘We
have created and activated the records, now how do we steward them?’ It
is in a meeting in the middle, the coming together of activists and
archivists and the blurring of the lines between the two roles, that
liberatory memory work can be forged.

In the face of precarity, care surfaces as a potent antidote. For
example, the careful ways that Eline Pollaert and Paul Van Trigt
describe the affordances of born-digital records documenting Dutch
disability rights activism (chapter seven) demonstrate a deep commitment
to including *all* community members both in the historic record and in
activist interventions. Likewise, the ways that Daniel Villar-Onrubia
describes the conceptualization of an archives honoring the legacy of
artist-activist Miguel Benlloch (chapter six) shows how emotions like
grief can motivate archival creation and reuse. Care—for those who came
before but also those who will come in the future—is also at the heart
of Rosemary Grennan’s work crafting the MayDay Rooms (chapter three) for
activist use. These collections of records catalyze relationships of
care between creators, archivists, users, communities. They remind us
that care hinges on accountability—we are accountable to those people in
our care. In the face of state failure, relationships of mutual care
between people and communities are what is left. In the end, as always,
it is not about the stuff (however much technical challenge the stuff
poses), but the people.

The records and archival practices described herein are, in the words of
Kera Lovell in this volume ‘not reflections but recipes’. They help us
imagine the necessary steps to forge liberatory memory work. But like
all good cooks, we must tweak the recipe to reflect our own influences,
ingredients and equipment. Here is where this book ends, and your work
as readers begins.

## References

Caswell, Michelle. *Urgent Archives: Enacting Liberatory Memory Work*,
London-New York: Routledge, 2021.

Caswell, Michelle, Vo Dang, Thuy and Sutherland, Tonia. ‘Community
Archives Lab’, Community Archives Lab UCLA, n.d.
<https://communityarchiveslab.ucla.edu/>

Sheffield, Rebecka Taves. ‘Facebook Live as a Recordmaking Technology’,
*Archivaria* 85 (2018): 96–120.

[^11Chapter9_1]: Michelle Caswell, Thuy Vo Dang and Tonia Sutherland, ‘Community
    Archives Lab’, Community Archives Lab UCLA. Uplifting liberatory
    memory work, n.d., <https://communityarchiveslab.ucla.edu/>

[^11Chapter9_2]: Michelle Caswell, *Urgent Archives: Enacting Liberatory Memory
    Work*, London-New York: Routledge, 2021.

[^11Chapter9_3]: Rebecka Taves Sheffield, ‘Facebook Live as a Recordmaking
    Technology’, *Archivaria* 85 (2018): 96–120.
